	Sounds risky? The quants at Long-Term didn’t think so. Among Long-Term’s selling points was the claim that they were a market neutral fund - in other words they could not be hurt by a significant movement in any of the major stock, bond or currency markets. So-called dynamic hedging allowed them to sell options on a particular stock index while avoiding exposure to the index itself. What was more, the fund had virtually no exposure to emerging markets. It was as if Long-Term really was on another planet, far from the mundane ups and downs of terrestrial finance. Indeed, the partners started to worry that they weren’t taking enough risks. Their target was a risk level corresponding to an annual variation (standard deviation) of 20 per cent of their assets. In practice, they were operating at closer to half that (meaning that their assets were fluctuating up and down by no more than 10 per cent).86 According to the firm’s Value at Risk models, it would take a ten-sigma (in other words, ten standard deviation) event to cause the firm to lose all its capital in a single year. But the probability of such an event, the quants calculated, was I in 1024 - effectively zero.87

	In October 1997, as if to prove that LTCM really was the ultimate Brains Trust, Merton and Scholes were awarded the Nobel Prize in economics. So self-confident were they and their partners that on 31 December 1997 they returned $2.7 billion to outside investors (strongly implying that they would much rather focus on investing their own money).88 It seemed as if intellect had triumphed over intuition, rocket science over risk-taking. Equipped with their magic black box, the partners at LTCM seemed poised to make fortunes beyond even George Soros’s wildest dreams. And then, just five months later, something happened that threatened to blow the lid right off the Nobel winners’ black box. For no immediately apparent reason, equity markets dipped, so that volatility went up instead of down. And the higher volatility went - it hit 27 in June, more than double the Long-Term projection - the more money was lost. May 1998 was Long-Term’s worst month ever: the fund dropped by 6.7 per cent. But this was just the beginning. In June it was down 10.1 per cent. And the less the fund’s assets were worth, the higher its leverage - the ratio of debt to capital - rose. In June it hit 31 to 1.89