Chunk 10: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

I may here relate one of my own dreams in which the remembered
impression is replaced by an association. In my dream I saw a person
whom I recognised, while dreaming, as the physician of my native town.
The features were indistinct and confused with the picture of one of my
colleague teachers, whom I still see occasionally. What association
there was between the two persons I could not discover on awakening. But
upon questioning my mother about the physician of my early childhood, I
discovered that he was a one-eyed man. My teacher, whose figure
concealed that of the physician in the dream, was also one-eyed. I have
not seen the physician for thirty-eight years, and I have not to my
knowledge thought of him in my waking state, although a scar on my chin
might have reminded me of his help.

As if to counterbalance the immense rôle ascribed to the infantile
impressions in the dream, many authors assert that the majority of
dreams show elements from the most recent time. Thus Robert[55] (p. 46)
declares that the normal dream generally occupies itself only with the
impressions of the recent days. We learn indeed that the theory of the
dream advanced by Robert imperatively demands that the old impressions
should be pushed back, and the recent ones brought to the front.
Nevertheless the fact claimed by Robert really exists; I can confirm
this from my own investigations. Nelson,[50] an American author, thinks
that the impressions most frequently found in the dream date from two or
three days before, as if the impressions of the day immediately
preceding the dream were not sufficiently weakened and remote.

Many authors who are convinced of the intimate connection between the
dream content and the waking state are impressed by the fact that
impressions which have intensely occupied the waking mind appear in the
dream only after they have been to some extent pushed aside from the
elaboration of the waking thought. Thus, as a rule, we do not dream of a
dead beloved person while we are still overwhelmed with sorrow. Still
Miss Hallam,[33] one of the latest observers, has collected examples
showing the very opposite behaviour, and claims for the point the right
of individual psychology.

The third and the most remarkable and incomprehensible peculiarity of
the memory in dreams, is shown in the selection of the reproduced
material, for stress is laid not only on the most significant, but also
on the most indifferent and superficial reminiscences. On this point I
shall quote those authors who have expressed their surprise in the most
emphatic manner.