Chunk 8: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

I have learned from my own dreams how largely the discovery of the
origin of some of the dream elements depends on accident. Thus, for
years before writing this book, I was haunted by the picture of a very
simply formed church tower which I could not recall having seen. I then
suddenly recognised it with absolute certainty at a small station
between Salzburg and Reichenhall. This was in the later nineties, and I
had travelled over the road for the first time in the year 1886. In
later years, when I was already busily engaged in the study of dreams, I
was quite annoyed at the frequent recurrence of the dream picture of a
certain peculiar locality. I saw it in definite local relation to my
person—to my left, a dark space from which many grotesque sandstone
figures stood out. A glimmer of recollection, which I did not quite
credit, told me it was the entrance to a beer-cellar, but I could
explain neither the meaning nor the origin of this dream picture. In
1907 I came by chance to Padua, which, to my regret, I had been unable
to visit since 1895. My first visit to this beautiful university city
was unsatisfactory; I was unable to see Giotto’s frescoes in the church
of the Madonna dell’ Arena, and on my way there turned back on being
informed that the little church was closed on the day. On my second
visit, twelve years later, I thought of compensating myself for this,
and before everything else I started out for Madonna dell’ Arena. On the
street leading to it, on my left, probably at the place where I had
turned in 1895, I discovered the locality which I had so often seen in
the dream, with its sandstone figures. It was in fact the entrance to a
restaurant garden.

One of the sources from which the dream draws material for
reproduction—material which in part is not recalled or employed in
waking thought—is to be found in childhood. I shall merely cite some of
the authors who have observed and emphasized this.

Hildebrandt[35] (p. 23): “It has already been expressly admitted that
the dream sometimes brings back to the mind with wonderful reproductive
ability remote and even forgotten experiences from the earliest
periods.”

Strümpell[66] (p. 40): “The subject becomes more interesting when we
remember how the dream sometimes brings forth, as it were, from among
the deepest and heaviest strata which later years have piled upon the
earliest childhood experiences, the pictures of certain places, things,
and persons, quite uninjured and with their original freshness. This is
not limited merely to such impressions as have gained vivid
consciousness during their origin or have become impressed with strong
psychic validity, and then later return in the dream as actual
reminiscences, causing pleasure to the awakened consciousness. On the
contrary, the depths of the dream memory comprise also such pictures of
persons, things, places, and early experiences as either possessed but
little consciousness and no psychic value at all, or have long ago lost
both, and therefore appear totally strange and unknown both in the dream
and in the waking state, until their former origin is revealed.”