Chunk 3: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

(_a_) _The Relation of the Dream to the Waking State._—The naïve
judgment of a person on awakening assumes that the dream—if indeed it
does not originate in another world—at any rate has taken the dreamer
into another world. The old physiologist, Burdach,[8] to whom we are
indebted for a careful and discriminating description of the phenomena
of dreams, expressed this conviction in an often-quoted passage, p. 474:
“The waking life never repeats itself with its trials and joys, its
pleasures and pains, but, on the contrary, the dream aims to relieve us
of these. Even when our whole mind is filled with one subject, when
profound sorrow has torn our hearts or when a task has claimed the whole
power of our mentality, the dream either gives us something entirely
strange, or it takes for its combinations only a few elements from
reality, or it only enters into the strain of our mood and symbolises
reality.”

L. Strümpell[66] expresses himself to the same effect in his _Nature and
Origin of Dreams_ (p. 16), a study which is everywhere justly held in
high respect: “He who dreams turns his back upon the world of waking
consciousness” (p. 17). “In the dream the memory of the orderly content
of the waking consciousness and its normal behaviour is as good as
entirely lost” (p. 19). “The almost complete isolation of the mind in
the dream from the regular normal content and course of the waking
state....”

But the overwhelming majority of the authors have assumed a contrary
view of the relation of the dream to waking life. Thus Haffner[32] (p.
19): “First of all the dream is the continuation of the waking state.
Our dreams always unite themselves with those ideas which have shortly
before been in our consciousness. Careful examination will nearly always
find a thread by which the dream has connected itself with the
experience of the previous day.” Weygandt[75] (p. 6), flatly contradicts
the above cited statement of Burdach: “For it may often be observed,
apparently in the great majority of dreams, that they lead us directly
back into everyday life, instead of releasing us from it.” Maury[48] (p.
56), says in a concise formula: “Nous rêvons de ce que nous avons vu,
dit, désiré ou fait.” Jessen,[36] in his _Psychology_, published in 1855
(p. 530), is somewhat more explicit: “The content of dreams is more or
less determined by the individual personality, by age, sex, station in
life, education, habits, and by events and experiences of the whole past
life.”

The ancients had the same idea about the dependence of the dream content
upon life. I cite Radestock[54] (p. 139): “When Xerxes, before his march
against Greece, was dissuaded from this resolution by good counsel, but
was again and again incited by dreams to undertake it, one of the old
rational dream-interpreters of the Persians, Artabanus, told him very
appropriately that dream pictures mostly contain that of which one has
been thinking while awake.”