Chunk 15: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

I shall here cite a number of such dreams collected by Jessen[36] (p.
527), traceable to more or less accidental objective sensory stimuli.
“Every indistinctly perceived noise gives rise to corresponding dream
pictures; the rolling of thunder takes us into the thick of battle, the
crowing of a cock may be transformed into human shrieks of terror, and
the creaking of a door may conjure up dreams of burglars breaking into
the house. When one of our blankets slips off at night we may dream that
we are walking about naked or falling into the water. If we lie
diagonally across the bed with our feet extending beyond the edge, we
may dream of standing on the brink of a terrifying precipice, or of
falling from a steep height. Should our head accidentally get under the
pillow we may then imagine a big rock hanging over us and about to crush
us under its weight. Accumulation of semen produces voluptuous dreams,
and local pain the idea of suffering ill treatment, of hostile attacks,
or of accidental bodily injuries.”

“Meier (_Versuch einer Erklärung des Nachtwandelns_, Halle, 1758, p.
33), once dreamed of being assaulted by several persons who threw him
flat on the ground and drove a stake into the ground between his big and
second toes. While imagining this in his dream he suddenly awoke and
felt a blade of straw sticking between his toes. The same author,
according to Hemmings (_Von den Traumen und Nachtwandeln_, Weimar, 1784,
p. 258) dreamed on another occasion that he was being hanged when his
shirt was pinned somewhat tight around his neck. Hauffbauer dreamed in
his youth of having fallen from a high wall and found upon waking that
the bedstead had come apart, and that he had actually fallen to the
floor.... Gregory relates that he once applied a hot-water bottle to his
feet, and dreamed of taking a trip to the summit of Mount Ætna, where he
found the heat on the ground almost unbearable. After having applied a
blistering plaster to his head, a second man dreamed of being scalped by
Indians; a third, whose shirt was damp, dreamed of being dragged through
a stream. An attack of gout caused the patient to believe that he was in
the hands of the Inquisition, and suffering pains of torture (Macnish).”

The argument based upon the resemblance between stimulus and dream
content is reinforced if through a systematic induction of stimuli we
succeed in producing dreams corresponding to the stimuli. According to
Macnish such experiments have already been made by Giron de
Buzareingues. “He left his knee exposed and dreamed of travelling in a
mail coach at night. He remarked in this connection that travellers
would well know how cold the knees become in a coach at night. Another
time he left the back of his head uncovered, and dreamed of taking part
in a religious ceremony in the open air. In the country where he lived
it was customary to keep the head always covered except on such
occasions.”

Maury[48] reports new observations on dreams produced in himself. (A
number of other attempts produced no results.)