Chunk 5: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

The contradiction expressed in these two views as to the relation
between dream life and waking life seems indeed insoluble. It will
therefore not be out of place to mention the description of F. W.
Hildebrandt[35] (1875), who believes that the peculiarities of the dream
can generally be described only by calling them a “series of contrasts
which apparently shade off into contradictions” (p. 8). “The first of
these contrasts is formed on the one hand by the strict isolation or
seclusion of the dream from true and actual life, and on the other hand
by the continuous encroachment of the one upon the other, and the
constant dependency of one upon the other. The dream is something
absolutely separated from the reality experienced during the waking
state; one may call it an existence hermetically sealed up and separated
from real life by an unsurmountable chasm. It frees us from reality,
extinguishes normal recollection of reality, and places us in another
world and in a totally different life, which at bottom has nothing in
common with reality....” Hildebrandt then asserts that in falling asleep
our whole being, with all its forms of existence, disappears “as through
an invisible trap door.” In the dream one is perhaps making a voyage to
St. Helena in order to offer the imprisoned Napoleon something exquisite
in the way of Moselle wine. One is most amicably received by the
ex-emperor, and feels almost sorry when the interesting illusion is
destroyed on awakening. But let us now compare the situation of the
dream with reality. The dreamer has never been a wine merchant, and has
no desire to become one. He has never made a sea voyage, and St. Helena
is the last place he would take as destination for such a voyage. The
dreamer entertains no sympathetic feeling for Napoleon, but on the
contrary a strong patriotic hatred. And finally the dreamer was not yet
among the living when Napoleon died on the island; so that it was beyond
the reach of possibility for him to have had any personal relations with
Napoleon. The dream experience thus appears as something strange,
inserted between two perfectly harmonising and succeeding periods.

“Nevertheless,” continues Hildebrandt, “the opposite is seemingly just
as true and correct. I believe that hand in hand with this seclusion and
isolation there can still exist the most intimate relation and
connection. We may justly say that no matter what the dream offers, it
finds its material in reality and in the psychic life arrayed around
this reality. However strange the dream may seem, it can never detach
itself from reality, and its most sublime as well as its most farcical
structures must always borrow their elementary material either from what
we have seen with our eyes in the outer world, or from what has
previously found a place somewhere in our waking thoughts; in other
words, it must be taken from what we had already experienced either
objectively or subjectively.”

(_b_) _The Material of the Dream.—Memory in the Dream._—That all the
material composing the content of the dream in some way originates in
experience, that it is reproduced in the dream, or recalled,—this at
least may be taken as an indisputable truth. Yet it would be wrong to
assume that such connection between dream content and reality will be
readily disclosed as an obvious product of the instituted comparison. On
the contrary, the connection must be carefully sought, and in many cases
it succeeds in eluding discovery for a long time. The reason for this is
to be found in a number of peculiarities evinced by the memory in
dreams, which, though universally known, have hitherto entirely eluded
explanation. It will be worth while to investigate exhaustively these
characteristics.

It often happens that matter appears in the dream content which one
cannot recognise later in the waking state as belonging to one’s
knowledge and experience. One remembers well enough having dreamed about
the subject in question, but cannot recall the fact or time of the
experience. The dreamer is therefore in the dark as to the source from
which the dream has been drawing, and is even tempted to believe an
independently productive activity on the part of the dream, until, often
long afterwards, a new episode brings back to recollection a former
experience given up as lost, and thus reveals the source of the dream.
One is thus forced to admit that something has been known and remembered
in the dream that has been withdrawn from memory during the waking
state.