Chunk 14: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

III. Internal (organic) physical excitations.

IV. Purely psychical exciting sources.

I. _The External Sensory Stimuli._—The younger Strümpell, son of the
philosopher whose writings on the subject have already more than once
served us as a guide in the problem of dreams, has, as is well known,
reported his observations on a patient who was afflicted with general
anæsthesia of the skin and with paralysis of several of the higher
sensory organs. This man merged into sleep when his few remaining
sensory paths from the outer world were shut off. When we wish to sleep
we are wont to strive for a situation resembling the one in Strümpell’s
experiment. We close the most important sensory paths, the eyes, and we
endeavour to keep away from the other senses every stimulus and every
change of the stimuli acting upon them. We then fall asleep, although we
are never perfectly successful in our preparations. We can neither keep
the stimuli away from the sensory organs altogether, nor can we fully
extinguish the irritability of the sensory organs. That we may at any
time be awakened by stronger stimuli should prove to us “that the mind
has remained in constant communication with the material world even
during sleep.” The sensory stimuli which reach us during sleep may
easily become the source of dreams.

There are a great many stimuli of such nature, ranging from those that
are unavoidable, being brought on by the sleeping state or at least
occasionally induced by it, to the accidental waking stimuli which are
adapted or calculated to put an end to sleep. Thus a strong light may
force itself into the eyes, a noise may become perceptible, or some
odoriferous matter may irritate the mucous membrane of the nose. In the
spontaneous movements of sleep we may lay bare parts of the body and
thus expose them to a sensation of cold, or through change of position
we may produce sensations of pressure and touch. A fly may bite us, or a
slight accident at night may simultaneously attack more than one sense.
Observers have called attention to a whole series of dreams in which the
stimulus verified on waking, and a part of the dream content
corresponded to such a degree that the stimulus could be recognised as
the source of the dream.