Chunk 29: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

The forgetting of dreams is treated in the most detailed manner by
Strümpell.[66] This forgetting is evidently a complex phenomenon; for
Strümpell does not explain it by a single reason, but by a considerable
number of reasons.

In the first place, all those factors which produce forgetfulness in the
waking state are also determinant for the forgetting of dreams. When
awake we are wont soon to forget a large number of sensations and
perceptions because they are too feeble, and because they are connected
with a slight amount of emotional feeling. This is also the case with
many dream pictures; they are forgotten because they are too weak, while
stronger pictures in proximity will be remembered. Moreover, the factor
of intensity in itself is not the only determinant for the preservation
of the dream pictures; Strümpell, as well as other authors (Calkins),
admits that dream pictures are often rapidly forgotten, although they
are known to have been vivid, whereas among those that are retained in
memory there are many that are very shadowy and hazy. Besides, in the
waking state one is wont to forget easily what happened only once, and
to note more easily things of repeated occurrence. But most dream
pictures are single experiences,[J] and this peculiarity equally
contributes towards the forgetting of all dreams. Of greater
significance is a third motive for forgetting. In order that feelings,
presentations, thoughts and the like, should attain a certain degree of
memory, it is important that they should not remain isolated, but that
they should enter into connections and associations of a suitable kind.
If the words of a short verse are taken and mixed together, it will be
very difficult to remember them. “When well arranged in suitable
sequence one word will help another, and the whole remains as sense
easily and firmly in the memory for a long time. Contradictions we
usually retain with just as much difficulty and rarity as things
confused and disarranged.” Now dreams in most cases lack sense and
order. Dream compositions are by their very nature incapable of being
remembered, and they are forgotten because they usually crumble together
the very next moment. To be sure, these conclusions are not in full
accord with the observation of Radestock[54] (p. 168), that we retain
best just those dreams which are most peculiar.

According to Strümpell, there are still other factors effective in the
forgetting of dreams which are derived from the relation of the dream to
the waking state. The forgetfulness of the waking consciousness for
dreams is evidently only the counterpart of the fact already mentioned,
that the dream (almost) never takes over successive memories from the
waking state, but only certain details of these memories which it tears
away from the habitual psychic connections in which they are recalled
while we are awake. The dream composition, therefore, has no place in
the company of psychic successions which fill the mind. It lacks all the
aids of memory. “In this manner the dream structure rises, as it were,
from the soil of our psychic life, and floats in psychic space like a
cloud in the sky, which the next breath of air soon dispels” (p. 87).
This is also aided by the fact that, upon awakening, the attention is
immediately seized by the inrushing sensory world, and only very few
dream pictures can withstand this power. They fade away before the
impressions of the new day like the glow of the stars before the
sunlight.

As a last factor favouring the forgetting of dreams, we may mention the
fact that most people generally take little interest in their dreams.
One who investigates dreams for a time, and takes a special interest in
them, usually dreams more during that time than at any other; that is,
he remembers his dreams more easily and more frequently.