Chunk 24: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

In a study particularly logical in its development, the psychiatrist
Krauss[39] found the origin of the dream as well as of deliria and
delusions in the same element, viz. the organically determined
sensation. According to this author there is hardly a place in the
organism which might not become the starting point of a dream or of a
delusion. Now organically determined sensations “may be divided into two
classes: (1) those of the total feeling (general sensations), (2)
specific sensations which are inherent in the principal systems of the
vegetative organism, which may be divided into five groups: (_a_) the
muscular, (_b_) the pneumatic, (_c_) the gastric, (_d_) the sexual,
(_e_) the peripheral sensations (p. 33 of the second article).”

The origin of the dream picture on the basis of the physical sensations
is conceived by Krauss as follows: The awakened sensation evokes a
presentation related to it in accordance with some law of association,
and combines with this, thus forming an organic structure, towards
which, however, consciousness does not maintain its normal attitude. For
it does not bestow any attention on the sensation itself, but concerns
itself entirely with the accompanying presentation; this is likewise the
reason why the state of affairs in question should have been so long
misunderstood (p. 11, &c.). Krauss finds for this process the specific
term of “transubstantiation of the feeling into dream pictures” (p. 24).

That the organic bodily sensations exert some influence on the formation
of the dream is nowadays almost universally acknowledged, but the
question as to the law underlying the relation between the two is
answered in various ways and often in obscure terms. On the basis of the
theory of bodily excitation the special task of dream interpretation is
to trace back the content of a dream to the causative organic stimulus,
and if we do not recognise the rules of interpretation advanced by
Scherner,[58] we frequently find ourselves confronted with the awkward
fact that the organic exciting source reveals itself in the content of
the dream only.

A certain agreement, however, is manifested in the interpretation of the
various forms of dreams which have been designated as “typical” because
they recur in so many persons with almost the same contents. Among these
are the well-known dreams of falling from heights, of the falling out of
teeth, of flying, and of embarrassment because of being naked or barely
clad. This last dream is said to be caused simply by the perception felt
in sleep that one has thrown off the bedcover and is exposed. The dream
of the falling out of teeth is explained by “dental irritation,” which
does not, however, of necessity imply a morbid state of excitation in
the teeth. According to Strümpell,[66] the flying dream is the adequate
picture used by the mind to interpret the sum of excitation emanating
from the rising and sinking of the pulmonary lobes after the cutaneous
sensation of the thorax has been reduced to insensibility. It is this
latter circumstance that causes a sensation related to the conception of
flying. Falling from a height in a dream is said to have its cause in
the fact that when unconsciousness of the sensation of cutaneous
pressure has set in, either an arm falls away from the body or a flexed
knee is suddenly stretched out, causing the feeling of cutaneous
pressure to return to consciousness, and the transition to consciousness
embodies itself psychically as a dream of falling. (Strümpell, p. 118).
The weakness of these plausible attempts at explanation evidently lies
in the fact that without any further elucidation they allow this or that
group of organic sensations to disappear from psychic perception or to
obtrude themselves upon it until the constellation favourable for the
explanation has been established. I shall, however, later have occasion
to recur to typical dreams and to their origin.