Chunk 19: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

The following dream of Maury[48] has become celebrated. He was sick, and
remained in bed; his mother sat beside him. He then dreamed of the reign
of terror at the time of the Revolution. He took part in terrible scenes
of murder, and finally he himself was summoned before the Tribunal.
There he saw Robespierre, Marat, Fouquier-Tinville, and all the sorry
heroes of that cruel epoch; he had to give an account of himself, and,
after all sort of incidents which did not fix themselves in his memory,
he was sentenced to death. Accompanied by an enormous crowd, he was led
to the place of execution. He mounted the scaffold, the executioner tied
him to the board, it tipped, and the knife of the guillotine fell. He
felt his head severed from the trunk, and awakened in terrible anxiety,
only to find that the top piece of the bed had fallen down, and had
actually struck his cervical vertebra in the same manner as the knife of
a guillotine.

This dream gave rise to an interesting discussion introduced by Le
Lorrain[45] and Egger[20] in the _Revue Philosophique_. The question was
whether, and how, it was possible for the dreamer to crowd together an
amount of dream content apparently so large in the short space of time
elapsing between the perception of the waking stimulus and the
awakening.

Examples of this nature make it appear that the objective stimuli during
sleep are the most firmly established of all the dream sources; indeed,
it is the only stimulus which plays any part in the layman’s knowledge.
If we ask an educated person, who is, however, unacquainted with the
literature of dreams, how dreams originate, he is sure to answer by
referring to a case familiar to him in which a dream has been explained
after waking by a recognised objective stimulus. Scientific
investigation cannot, however, stop here, but is incited to further
research by the observation that the stimulus influencing the senses
during sleep does not appear in the dream at all in its true form, but
is replaced by some other presentation which is in some way related to
it. But the relation existing between the stimulus and the result of the
dream is, according to Maury,[47] “une affinité quelconque mais qui
n’est pas unique et exclusive” (p. 72). If we read, _e.g._, three of
Hildebrandt’s “Alarm Clock Dreams,” we will then have to inquire why the
same stimulus evoked so many different results, and why just these
results and no others.

(P. 37). “I am taking a walk on a beautiful spring morning. I saunter
through the green fields to a neighbouring village, where I see the
natives going to church in great numbers, wearing their holiday attire
and carrying their hymn-books under their arms. I remember that it is
Sunday, and that the morning service will soon begin. I decide to attend
it, but as I am somewhat overheated I also decide to cool off in the
cemetery surrounding the church. While reading the various epitaphs, I
hear the sexton ascend the tower and see the small village bell in the
cupola which is about to give signal for the beginning of the devotions.
For another short while it hangs motionless, then it begins to swing,
and suddenly its notes resound so clearly and penetratingly that my
sleep comes to an end. But the sound of bells comes from the alarm
clock.”