Chunk 21: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

II. _Internal (Subjective) Sensory Stimuli._—Notwithstanding all
objections to the contrary, we must admit that the rôle of the objective
sensory stimuli as a producer of dreams has been indisputably
established, and if these stimuli seem perhaps insufficient in their
nature and frequency to explain all dream pictures, we are then directed
to look for other dream sources acting in an analogous manner. I do not
know where the idea originated that along with the outer sensory stimuli
the inner (subjective) stimuli should also be considered, but as a
matter of fact this is done more or less fully in all the more recent
descriptions of the etiology of dreams. “An important part is played in
dream illusions,” says Wundt[36] (p. 363), “by those subjective
sensations of seeing and hearing which are familiar to us in the waking
state as a luminous chaos in the dark field of vision, ringing, buzzing,
&c., of the ears, and especially irritation of the retina. This explains
the remarkable tendency of the dream to delude the eyes with numbers of
similar or identical objects. Thus we see spread before our eyes
numberless birds, butterflies, fishes, coloured beads, flowers, &c. Here
the luminous dust in the dark field of vision has taken on phantastic
figures, and the many luminous points of which it consists are embodied
by the dream in as many single pictures, which are looked upon as moving
objects owing to the mobility of the luminous chaos. This is also the
root of the great fondness of the dream for the most complex animal
figures, the multiplicity of forms readily following the form of the
subjective light pictures.”

The subjective sensory stimuli as a source of the dream have the obvious
advantage that unlike the objective stimuli they are independent of
external accidents. They are, so to speak, at the disposal of the
explanation as often as it needs them. They are, however, in so far
inferior to the objective sensory stimuli that the rôle of dream
inciter, which observation and experiment have proven for the latter,
can be verified in their case only with difficulty or not at all. The
main proof for the dream-inciting power of subjective sensory
excitements is offered by the so-called hypnogogic hallucinations, which
have been described by John Müller as “phantastic visual
manifestations.” They are those very vivid and changeable pictures which
occur regularly in many people during the period of falling asleep, and
which may remain for awhile even after the eyes have been opened.
Maury,[48] who was considerably troubled by them, subjected them to a
thorough study, and maintained that they are related to or rather
identical with dream pictures—this has already been asserted by John
Müller. Maury states that a certain psychic passivity is necessary for
their origin; it requires a relaxation of the tension of attention (p.
59). But in any ordinary disposition a hypnogogic hallucination may be
produced by merging for a second into such lethargy, after which one
perhaps awakens until this oft-repeated process terminates in sleep.
According to Maury, if one awakens shortly thereafter, it is often
possible to demonstrate the same pictures in the dream which one has
perceived as hypnogogic hallucinations before falling asleep (p. 134).
Thus it once happened to Maury with a group of pictures of grotesque
figures, with distorted features and strange headdresses, which obtruded
themselves upon him with incredible importunity during the period of
falling asleep, and which he recalled having dreamed upon awakening. On
another occasion, while suffering from hunger, because he kept himself
on a rather strict diet, he saw hypnogogically a plate and a hand armed
with a fork taking some food from the plate. In his dream he found
himself at a table abundantly supplied with food, and heard the rattle
made by the diners with their forks. On still another occasion, after
falling asleep with irritated and painful eyes, he had the hypnogogic
hallucination of seeing microscopically small characters which he was
forced to decipher one by one with great exertion; having been awakened
from his sleep an hour later, he recalled a dream in which there was an
open book with very small letters, which he was obliged to read through
with laborious effort.

Just as in the case of these pictures, auditory hallucinations of words,
names, &c., may also appear hypnogogically, and then repeat themselves
in the dream, like an overture announcing the principal motive of the
opera which is to follow.

A more recent observer of hypnogogic hallucinations, G. Trumbull
Ladd,[40] takes the same path pursued by John Müller and Maury. By dint
of practice he succeeded in acquiring the faculty of suddenly arousing
himself, without opening his eyes, two to five minutes after having
gradually fallen asleep, which gave him opportunity to compare the
sensations of the retina just vanishing with the dream pictures
remaining in his memory. He assures us that an intimate relation between
the two can always be recognised, in the sense that the luminous dots
and lines of the spontaneous light of the retina produced, so to speak,
the sketched outline or scheme for the psychically perceived dream
figures. A dream, _e.g._, in which he saw in front of him clearly
printed lines which he read and studied, corresponded to an arrangement
of the luminous dots and lines in the retina in parallel lines, or, to
express it in his own words: “The clearly printed page, which he was
reading in the dream, resolved itself into an object which appeared to
his waking perception like part of an actual printed sheet looked at
through a little hole in a piece of paper, from too great a distance to
be made out distinctly.” Without in any way under-estimating the central
part of the phenomenon, Ladd believes that hardly any visual dream
occurs in our minds that is not based on material furnished by this
inner condition of stimulation in the retina. This is particularly true
of dreams occurring shortly after falling asleep in a dark room, while
dreams occurring in the morning near the period of awakening receive
their stimulation from the objective light penetrating the eye from the
lightened room. The shifting and endlessly variable character of the
spontaneous luminous excitation of the retina corresponds exactly to the
fitful succession of pictures presented to us in our dreams. If we
attach any importance to Ladd’s observations, we cannot underrate the
productiveness of this subjective source of excitation for the dream;
for visual pictures apparently form the principal constituent of our
dreams. The share furnished from the spheres of the other senses, beside
the sense of hearing, is more insignificant and inconstant.