Chunk 7: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

That the dream has at its disposal recollections which are inaccessible
to the waking state is such a remarkable and theoretically important
fact that I should like to urge more attention to it by reporting
several other “Hypermnesic Dreams.” Maury[48] relates that for some time
the word Mussidan used to occur to his mind during the day. He knew it
to be the name of a French city, but nothing else. One night he dreamed
of a conversation with a certain person who told him that she came from
Mussidan, and, in answer to his question where the city was, she
replied: “Mussidan is a principal country town in the Département de La
Dordogne.” On waking, Maury put no faith in the information received in
his dream; the geographical lexicon, however, showed it to be perfectly
correct. In this case the superior knowledge of the dream is confirmed,
but the forgotten source of this knowledge has not been traced.

Jessen[36] tells (p. 55) of a quite similar dream occurrence, from more
remote times. Among others we may here mention the dream of the elder
Scaliger (Hennings, _l.c._, p. 300), who wrote a poem in praise of
celebrated men of Verona, and to whom a man, named Brugnolus, appeared
in a dream, complaining that he had been neglected. Though Scaliger did
not recall ever having heard of him, he wrote some verses in his honour,
and his son later discovered at Verona that a Brugnolus had formerly
been famous there as a critic.

Myers is said to have published a whole collection of such hypermnesic
dreams in the _Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research_, which
are unfortunately inaccessible to me. I believe every one who occupies
himself with dreams will recognise as a very common phenomenon the fact
that the dream gives proof of knowing and recollecting matters unknown
to the waking person. In my psychoanalytic investigations of nervous
patients, of which I shall speak later, I am every week more than once
in position to convince my patients from their dreams that they are well
acquainted with quotations, obscene expressions, &c., and that they make
use of these in their dreams, although they have forgotten them in the
waking state. I shall cite here a simple case of dream hypermnesia
because it was easy to trace the source which made the knowledge
accessible to the dream.

A patient dreamed in a lengthy connection that he ordered a
“Kontuszówka” in a café, and after reporting this inquired what it might
mean, as he never heard the name before. I was able to answer that
Kontuszówka was a Polish liquor which he could not have invented in his
dream, as the name had long been familiar to me in advertisements. The
patient would not at first believe me, but some days later, after he had
realised his dream of the café, he noticed the name on a signboard at
the street corner, which he had been obliged to pass for months at least
twice a day.