Chunk 40: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

But it has been repeatedly observed that the associations which connect
the dream presentations with one another are of a particular kind, and
different from those found in the waking mental activity. Thus
Volkelt[72] says: “In the dream, the ideas chase and hunt each other on
the strength of accidental similarities and barely perceptible
connections. All dreams are pervaded by such loose and free
associations.” Maury[48] attaches great value to this characteristic of
connection between presentations, which allows him to bring the dream
life in closer analogy to certain mental disturbances. He recognises two
main characters of the _délire_: “(1) une action spontanée et comme
automatique de l’esprit; (2) une association vicieuse et irregulière des
idées” (p. 126). Maury gives us two excellent examples from his own
dreams, in which the mere similarity of sound forms the connection of
the dream presentations. He dreamed once that he undertook a pilgrimage
(_pélerinage_) to Jerusalem or Mecca. After many adventures he was with
the chemist Pelletier; the latter after some talk gave him a zinc shovel
(_pelle_) which became his long battle sword in the dream fragment which
followed (p. 137). On another occasion he walked in a dream on the
highway and read the kilometres on the milestones; presently he was with
a spice merchant who had large scales with which to weigh Maury; the
spice merchant then said to him: “You are not in Paris; but on the
island Gilolo.” This was followed by many pictures, in which he saw the
flower Lobelia, then the General Lopez, of whose demise he had read
shortly before. He finally awoke while playing a game of lotto.

We are, however, quite prepared to hear that this depreciation of the
psychic activities of the dream has not remained without contradiction
from the other side. To be sure, contradiction seems difficult here. Nor
is it of much significance that one of the depreciators of dream life,
Spitta[64] (p. 118), assures us that the same psychological laws which
govern the waking state rule the dream also, or that another (Dugas[19])
states: “Le rêve n’est pas déraison ni même irraison pure,” as long as
neither of them has made any effort to bring this estimation into
harmony with the psychic anarchy and dissolution of all functions in the
dream described by them. Upon others, however, the possibility seems to
have dawned that the madness of the dream is perhaps not without its
method—that it is perhaps only a sham, like that of the Danish prince,
to whose madness the intelligent judgment here cited refers. These
authors must have refrained from judging by appearances, or the
appearance which the dream showed to them was quite different.

Without wishing to linger at its apparent absurdity, Havelock Ellis[23]
considers the dream as “an archaic world of vast emotions and imperfect
thoughts,” the study of which may make us acquainted with primitive
stages of development of the psychic life. A thinker like Delbœuf[16]
asserts—to be sure without adducing proof against the contradictory
material, and hence indeed unjustly: “Dans le sommeil, hormis la
perception, toutes les facultés de l’esprit, intelligence, imagination,
mémoire, volonté, moralité, restant intactes dans leur essence;
seulement, elles s’appliquent à des objets imaginaires et mobiles. Le
songeur est un acteur qui joue à volonté les fous et les sages, les
bourreaux et les victimes, les nains et les géants, les démons et les
anges” (p. 222). The Marquis of Hervey, who is sharply controverted by
Maury,[48] and whose work I could not obtain despite all effort, seems
to combat most energetically the under-estimation of the psychic
capacity in the dream. Maury speaks of him as follows (p. 19): “M. le
Marquis d’Hervey prête à l’intelligence, durant le sommeil toute sa
liberté d’action et d’attention et il ne semble faire consister le
sommeil que dans l’occlusion des sens, dans leur fermeture au monde
extérieur; en sorte que l’homme qui dort ne se distingué guère, selon sa
manière de voir, de l’homme qui laisse vaguer sa pensée en se bouchant
les sens; toute la différence qui séparé alors la pensée ordinaire du
celle du dormeur c’est que, chez celui-ci, l’idée prend une forme
visible, objective et ressemble, à s’y méprendre, à la sensation
déterminée par les objets extérieurs; le souvenir revêt l’apparence du
fait présent.”

Maury adds, however; “Qu’il y a une différence de plus et capitale à
savoir que les facultés intellectuelles de l’homme endormi n’offrent pas
l’équilibre qu’elles gardent chez l’homme l’éveillé.”