	6. Inference. In his ‘Essay Towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances’ (published posthumously in 1764), Thomas Bayes set himself the following problem: ‘Given the number of times in which an unknown event has happened and failed; Required the chance that the probability of its happening in a single trial lies somewhere between any two degrees of probability that can be named.’ His resolution of the problem - ‘The probability of any event is the ratio between the value at which an expectation depending on the happening of the event ought to be computed, and the chance of the thing expected upon it’s [sic] happening’ - anticipates the modern formulation that expected utility is the probability of an event times the payoff received in case of that event.18

	In short, it was not merchants but mathematicians who were the true progenitors of modern insurance. Yet it took clergymen to turn theory into practice.

	Greyfriars Kirkyard, on the hill that is the heart of Edinburgh’s Old Town, is best known today for Greyfriars Bobby, the loyal Skye terrier who refused to desert his master’s grave, and also for the grave robbers - the so-called ‘Resurrection Men’ - who went there in the early nineteenth century to supply the medical school at Edinburgh University with corpses for dissection. But Greyfriars’s importance in the history of finance lies in the earlier mathematical work of its minister, Robert Wallace, and his friend Alexander Webster, who was minister of Tolbooth. Along with Colin Maclaurin, Professor of Mathematics at Edinburgh, it was their achievement to create the first modern insurance fund, based on correct actuarial and financial principles, rather than mercantile gambling.

	Living in Auld Reekie, as the distinctly smelly Scottish capital was then known, Wallace and Webster had a keen sense of the fragility of the human condition. They themselves lived to ripe old ages: 74 and 75 respectively. But Maclaurin died at the age of just 48, having fallen from his horse and suffered exposure while trying to evade the Jacobites during the 1745 rising. Invasions of Papist Highlanders were only one of the hazards inhabitants of Edinburgh faced in the mid eighteenth century. Average life expectancy at birth is unlikely to have been better than it was in England, where it was just 37 until the 1800s. It may even have been as bad as in London, where it was 23 in the late eighteenth century - perhaps even worse, given the Scottish capital’s notoriously bad hygiene.19 For Wallace and Webster, one group of people seemed especially vulnerable to the consequences of premature death. Under the Law of Ann (1672), the widow and children of a deceased minister of the Church of Scotland received only half a year’s stipend in the year of the minister’s death. After that, they faced penury. A supplementary scheme had been set up by the Bishop of Edinburgh in 1711, but on the traditional pay-as-you-go basis. Wallace and Webster knew this to be unsatisfactory.

	The spirit of insurance: Alexander Webster

	preaching in Edinburgh