	A few people smelt a rat. ‘Have you all gone crazy in Paris?’ wrote Voltaire to M. de Génonville in 1719. ‘It is a chaos I cannot fathom . . .’56 The Irish banker and economist Richard Cantillon was so sure that Law’s System would implode that he sold up and left Paris in early August 1719.57 From London Daniel Defoe was dismissive: the French had merely ‘run up a piece of refined air’. Law’s career, he sneered, illustrated a new strategy for success in life:

	You must put on a sword, kill a beau or two, get into Newgate [prison], be condemned to be hanged, break prison if you can - remember that by the way - get over to some strange country, turn stock-jobber, set up a Mississippi stock, bubble a nation, and you will soon be a great man; if you have but great good luck . . .58

	But a substantial number of better-off Parisians were seduced by Law. Flush with cash of his own making, he offered to pay pension arrears and indeed to pay pensions in advance - a sure way to build support among the privileged classes. By September 1719 there were hundreds of people thronging the rue Quincampoix, a narrow thoroughfare between the rue St Martin and the rue St Denis where the Company had its share-issuing office. A clerk at the British embassy described it as ‘crowded from early in the morning to late at night with princes and princesses, dukes and peers and duchesses etc., in a word all that is great in France. They sell estates and pawn jewels to purchase Mississippi.’59 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who visited Paris in 1719, was ‘delighted . . . to see an Englishman (at least a Briton) absolute in Paris, I mean Mr. Law, who treats their dukes and peers extremely de haut en bas and is treated by them with the utmost submission and respect - Poor souls!’60 It was in these heady times that the word millionaire was first coined. (Like entrepreneurs, millionaires were invented in France.)

	Small wonder John Law was seen at Mass for the first time on 10 December, having converted to Catholicism in order to be eligible for public office. He had much to thank his Maker for. When he was duly appointed Controller General of Finances the following month, his triumph was complete. He was now in charge of:

	the collection of all France’s indirect taxes;

	the entire French national debt;

	the twenty-six French mints that produced the country’s

	gold and silver coins;

	the colony of Louisiana;

	the Mississippi Company, which had a monopoly on the

	import and sale of tobacco;

	the French fur trade with Canada; and

	all France’s trade with Africa, Asia and the East Indies.

	The end of the show in the rue Quincampoix, 1719, from The

	Great Scene of Folly, published in Amsterdam a year later

	Further, in his own right, Law owned:

	the Hôtel de Nevers in the rue de Richelieu (now the Bibliothèque

	Nationale);

	the Mazarin Palace, where the Company had its offices;

	more than a third of the buildings at the place Vendôme

	(then place Louis le Grand);

	more than twelve country estates;

	several plantations in Louisiana; and

	100 million livres of shares in the Mississippi Company.61

	Louis XIV of France had said ‘L’état, c’est moi’: I am the state. John Law could legitimately say ‘L’économie, c’est moi’: I am the economy.