	From now on, the welfare state would cover people against all the vagaries of modern life. If they were born sick, the state would pay. If they could not afford education, the state would pay. If they could not find work, the state would pay. If they were too ill to work, the state would pay. When they retired, the state would pay. And when they finally died, the state would pay their dependants. This certainly chimed with one of the objectives of the post-war American occupation: ‘To replace a feudal economy by a welfare economy’.41 Yet it would be wrong to assume (as a number of post-war commentators did) that Japan’s welfare state was ‘imposed wholesale by an alien power’.42 In reality, the Japanese set up their own welfare state - and they began to do so long before the end of the Second World War. It was the mid twentieth-century state’s insatiable appetite for able-bodied young soldiers and workers, not social altruism, that was the real driver. As the American political scientist Harold D. Lasswell put it, Japan in the 1930s became a garrison state.43 But it was one which carried within it the promise of a ‘warfare-welfare state’, offered social security in return for military sacrifice.

	There had been some basic social insurance in Japan before the 1930s: factory accident insurance and health insurance (introduced for factory workers in 1927). But this covered less than two fifths of the industrial workforce.44 Significantly, the plan for a Japanese Welfare Ministry (Kōseishō) was approved by Japan’s imperial government on 9 July 1937, just two months after the outbreak of war with China.45 Its first step was to introduce a new system of universal health insurance to supplement the existing programme for industrial employees. Between the end of 1938 and the end of 1944, the number of citizens covered by the scheme increased nearly a hundred-fold, from just over 500,000 to over 40 million. The aim was explicit: a healthier populace would ensure healthier recruits to the Emperor’s armed forces. The wartime slogan of ‘all people are soldiers’ (kokumin kai hei) was adapted to become ‘all people should have insurance’ (kokumin kai hoken). And to ensure universal coverage, the medical profession and pharmaceutical industry were essentially subordinated to the state.46 The war years also saw the introduction of compulsory pension schemes for seamen and workers, with the state covering 10 per cent of the costs, while employers and employees each contributed 5.5 per cent of the latter’s wages. The first steps towards the large-scale provision of public housing were also taken. So what happened after the war in Japan was in large measure the extension of the warfare-welfare state. Now ‘all people should have pensions’, kokumin kai nenkin. Now there should be unemployment insurance, rather than the earlier paternalistic practice of keeping workers on payrolls even in lean times. Small wonder some Japanese tended to think of welfare in nationalistic terms, a kind of peaceful mode of national aggrandisement. The 1950 report, with its British-style recommendations, was in fact rejected by the government. Only in 1961, long after the end of American control, were most of its recommendations adopted. By the late 1970s a Japanese politician, Nakagawa Yatsuhiro, could boast that Japan had become ‘The Welfare Super-Power’ ( fukushi chōdaikoku), precisely because its system was different from (and superior to) Western models.47