	ad

	Scruggs’s associate Timothy Balducci was taped offering $40,000 to Judge Lackey. ‘The only person in the world outside of me and you that has discussed this is me and Dick,’ Mr Balducci told Lackey. ‘We, uh, like I say, it ain’t but three people in this world that know anything about this . . . and two of them are sitting here, and the other one, uh, being Scruggs . . . He and I, um, how shall I say, for over the last five or six years there, there are bodies buried that, that you know, that he and I know where.’ On 1 November 2007 Balducci called Scruggs to tell him that the Judge now felt ‘a little more exposed on the facts and the law than he was before’ and to ask if Scruggs ‘would do a little something else, you know, to ’bout 10 or so more’. Scruggs said he would ‘take care of it’.

	ae

	For a further discussion of this crucial distinction see the Afterword, pp. 343-4.

	af

	The human propensity to shut stable doors after horses have bolted is well illustrated by the history of fire insurance. It was after the New York fire of 1835 that American states began to insist that insurance companies maintain adequate reserves. It was after the Hamburg fire of 1842 that reinsurance was developed as a way for insurance companies to share the risk of major disasters.

	ag

	Wallace was also a member of the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh, to which he presented his ‘Dissertation on the Numbers of Mankind in Ancient and Modern Times’, a work which in some respects anticipated Thomas Malthus’s later Essay on the Principle of Population.

	ah

	Scott was a victim of the financial crisis triggered by the first Latin American debt crisis (see Chapter 2). Perhaps he was also a victim of his own appetite for real estate. To help finance the cost of his beloved country seat at Abbotsford, the author had become a sleeping partner in the printers that published his books, James Ballantyne and Co., and the associated publishing house of John Ballantyne & Co. He was also an investor in his own publisher, Archibald Constable, believing that the returns on these equity stakes would be superior to traditional royalties. He kept these business interests secret, believing them to be incompatible with his standing as a Clerk to the Court of Sessions and a Sheriff. The failure of Ballantyne and Constable in 1825 left Scott with debts of between £117,000 and £130,000. Rather than sell Abbotsford, Scott vowed to write his way back into the black. He succeeded, but at considerable cost to his own health, dying in 1832. Had he died earlier, the creditors would have been the beneficiaries of the Scottish Widows policy.

	ai

	The original 1986 advertisement was photographed by David Bailey with the actor Roger Moore’s daughter Deborah as the improbably alluring Scottish Widow.

	aj

	Friedman noted in 1988 that he had given much the same advice on inflation to the Chinese government, yet found that he received no ‘avalanche of protests for [his] having been willing to give advice to so evil a government’, despite the fact that it ‘has been and still is more repressive than the Chilean military junta’.

	ak

	That is to say, the notional amount outstanding if all derivatives paid out is roughly four and a half times the contracts’ estimated market value.

	al

	Arousing expectations which it may be impossible to fulfil. The fifteen-fold increase of house prices in England between 1975 and 2006 has put home ownership out of reach for nearly all those first-time buyers who cannot get financial assistance from their parents.

	am