	In evolution, big extinctions tend to be caused by outside shocks, like an asteroid hitting the earth. A large meteor struck Greenwich in July 1998, when it emerged that Salomon Smith Barney (as Salomon Brothers had been renamed following its takeover by Travelers) was closing down its US bond arbitrage group, the place where Meriwether had made his Wall Street reputation, and an outfit that had been virtually replicating LTCM’s trading strategies. Clearly, the firm’s new owners did not like the losses they had been seeing since May. Then, on Monday 17 August 1998, that was followed by a giant asteroid - not from outer space, but from one of earth’s flakiest emerging markets as, weakened by political upheaval, declining oil revenues and a botched privatization, the ailing Russian financial system collapsed. A desperate Russian government was driven to default on its debts (including rouble-denominated domestic bonds), fuelling the fires of volatility throughout the world’s financial markets.90 Coming in the wake of the Asian crisis of the previous year, the Russian default had a contagious effect on other emerging markets, and indeed some developed markets too. Credit spreads blew out.bg Stock markets plunged. Equity volatility hit 29 per cent. At peak it reached 45 per cent, which implied that the indices would move 3 per cent each day for the next five years.91 Now, that just wasn’t supposed to happen, not according to the Long-Term risk models. The quants had said that Long-Term was unlikely to lose more than $45 million in a single day.92 On Friday 21 August 1998, it lost $550 million - 15 per cent of its entire capital, driving its leverage up to 42:1.93 The traders in Greenwich stared, slack-jawed and glassy-eyed, at their screens. It couldn’t be happening. But it was. Suddenly all the different markets where Long-Term had exposure were moving in sync, nullifying the protection offered by diversification. In quant-speak, the correlations had gone to one. By the end of the month, Long-Term was down 44 per cent: a total loss of over $1.8 billion.94

	August is usually a time of thin trading in financial markets. Most people are out of town. John Meriwether was on the other side of the world, in Beijing. Dashing home, he and his partners desperately sought a white knight to rescue them. They tried Warren Buffett in Omaha, Nebraska - despite the fact that just months before LTCM had been aggressively shorting shares in Buffett’s company Berkshire Hathaway. He declined. On 24 August they reluctantly sought a meeting with none other than George Soros.95 It was the ultimate humiliation: the quants from Planet Finance begging for a bail-out from the earthling prophet of irrational, unquantifiable reflexivity. Soros recalls that he ‘offered Meriwether $500 million if he could find another $500 million from someone else. It didn’t seem likely . . .’ JP Morgan offered $200 million. Goldman Sachs also offered to help. But others held back. Their trading desks scented blood. If Long-Term was going bust, they just wanted their collateral, not to buy Long-Term’s positions. And they didn’t give a damn if volatility went through the roof. In the end, fearful that Long-Term’s failure could trigger a generalized meltdown on Wall Street, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York hastily brokered a $3.625 billion bail-out by fourteen Wall Street banks.96 But the original investors - who included some of the self-same banks, but also some smaller players like the University of Pittsburgh - had meanwhile seen their holdings cut from $4.9 billion to just $400 million. The sixteen partners were left with $30 million between them, a fraction of the fortune they had anticipated.