	A large part of the trouble is that it is so bureaucratically difficult to establish legal title to property in places like South America. In Argentina today, according to the World Bank, it takes around thirty days to register a property, but it used to be much longer. In some countries - Bangladesh and Haiti are the worst - it can take closer to three hundred days. When de Soto and his researchers tried to secure legal authorization to build a house on state-owned land in Peru, it took six years and eleven months, during which they had to deal with fifty-two different government offices. In the Philippines, formalizing home ownership was until recently a 168-step process involving fifty-three public and private agencies and taking between thirteen and twenty-five years. In the English-speaking world, by contrast, it can take as little as two days and seldom more than three weeks. In de Soto’s eyes, bureaucratic obstacles to securing legal ownership make the assets of the poor so much ‘dead capital . . . like water in a lake high up in the Andes - an untapped stock of potential energy’. Breathing life into this capital, he argues, is the key to providing countries like Peru with a more prosperous future. Only with a working system of property rights can the value of a house be properly established by the market; can it easily be bought and sold; can it legally be used as collateral for loans; can its owner be held to account in other transactions he may enter into. Moreover, excluding the poor from the pale of legitimate property ownership ensures that they operate at least partially in a grey or black economic zone, beyond the reach of the state’s dead hand. This is doubly damaging. It prevents effective taxation. And it reduces the legitimacy of the state in the eyes of the populace. Poor countries are poor, in other words, because they lack secure property rights, the ‘hidden architecture’ of a successful economy. ‘Property law is not a silver bullet,’ de Soto admits, ‘but it is the missing link . . . Without property law, you will never be able to accomplish other reforms in a sustainable manner.’ And poor countries are also more likely to fail as democracies because they lack an electorate of stakeholders. ‘Property rights will eventually lead to democracy,’ de Soto has argued, ‘because you can’t sustain a market-oriented property system unless you provide a democratic system. That’s the only way investors can feel secure.’67

	To some - like the Maoist terrorist group Shining Path, who tried to assassinate him in 1992 in a bomb attack that killed three people - de Soto is a villain.68 Other critics denounced him as the Rasputin behind the now disgraced Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori. To others, de Soto’s efforts to globalize the property-owning democracy have made him a hero. Former President Bill Clinton has called him ‘probably the greatest living economist’, while his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, has called de Soto’s achievements ‘extraordinary’. In 2004 the American libertarian think-tank the Cato Institute awarded him the biennial Milton Friedman Prize for work that ‘exemplifies the spirit and practice of liberty’. De Soto and his Institute for Liberty and Democracy have advised governments in Egypt, El Salvador, Ghana, Haiti, Honduras, Kazakhstan, Mexico, the Philippines and Tanzania. The critical question is, of course, does his theory work in practice?