	That is precisely why anyone who lends money to a merchant, if only for the duration of an ocean voyage, needs to be compensated. We usually call the compensation interest: the amount paid to the lender over and above the sum lent, or the principal. Overseas trade of the sort that Venice depended on could not have happened if its financiers had not been rewarded in some way for risking their money on mere boards and men.

	But why does Shylock turn out to be such a villain, demanding literally a pound of flesh - in effect Antonio’s death - if he cannot fulfil his obligations? The answer is of course that Shylock is one of the many moneylenders in history to have belonged to an ethnic minority. By Shakespeare’s time, Jews had been providing commercial credit in Venice for nearly a century. They did their business in front of the building once known as the Banco Rosso, sitting behind their tables - their tavule - and on their benches, their banci. But the Banco Rosso was located in a cramped ghetto some distance away from the centre of the city.

	There was a good reason why Venetian merchants had to come to the Jewish ghetto if they wanted to borrow money. For Christians, lending money at interest was a sin. Usurers, people who lent money at interest, had been excommunicated by the Third Lateran Council in 1179. Even arguing that usury was not a sin had been condemned as heresy by the Council of Vienna in 1311-12. Christian usurers had to make restitution to the Church before they could be buried on hallowed ground. They were especially detested by the Franciscan and Dominican orders, founded in 1206 and 1216 (just after the publication of Fibonacci’s Liber Abaci). The power of this taboo should not be underestimated, though it had certainly weakened by Shakespeare’s time.23

	In Florence’s Duomo (cathedral) there is a fresco by Domenico di Michelino that shows the great Florentine poet Dante Alighieri holding his book the Divine Comedy. As Dante imagined it in Canto XVII of his masterpiece, there was a special part of the seventh circle of Hell reserved for usurers:

	Sorrow . . . gushed from their eyes and made their sad tears flow;

	While this way and that they flapped their hands, for ease

	From the hot soil now, and now from the burning snow,

	Behaving, in fact, exactly as one sees

	Dogs in the summer, scuffing with snout and paw

	When they’re eaten up with gnats and flies and fleas.

	I looked at many thus scorched by the fiery flaw,

	And though I scanned their faces with the utmost heed,

	There was no one there I recognized; but I saw

	How, stamped with charge and tincture plain to read,

	About the neck of each a great purse hung,

	Whereon their eyes seemed still to fix and feed.

	Jews, too, were not supposed to lend at interest. But there was a convenient get-out clause in the Old Testament book of Deuteronomy: ‘Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon usury.’ In other words, a Jew might legitimately lend to a Christian, though not to another Jew. The price of doing so was social exclusion.