Chunk 20: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

“A second combination. It is a clear day, the streets are covered with
deep snow. I have promised to take part in a sleigh-ride, but have had
to wait for some time before it was announced that the sleigh is in
front of my house. The preparations for getting into the sleigh are now
made. I put on my furs and adjust my muff, and at last I am in my place.
But the departure is still delayed, until the reins give the impatient
horses the perceptible sign. They start, and the sleigh bells, now
forcibly shaken, begin their familiar janizary music with a force that
instantly tears the gossamer of my dream. Again it is only the shrill
sound of my alarm clock.”

Still a third example. “I see the kitchen-maid walk along the corridor
to the dining-room with several dozen plates piled up. The porcelain
column in her arms seems to me to be in danger of losing its
equilibrium. ‘Take care,’ I exclaim, ‘you will drop the whole pile.’ The
usual retort is naturally not wanting—that she is used to such things.
Meanwhile I continue to follow her with my worried glance, and behold!
at the door-step the fragile dishes fall, tumble, and roll across the
floor in hundreds of pieces. But I soon notice that the noise continuing
endlessly is not really a rattling but a true ringing, and with this
ringing the dreamer now becomes aware that the alarm clock has done its
duty.”

The question why the dreaming mind misjudges the nature of the objective
sensory stimulus has been answered by Strümpell,[66] and almost
identically by Wundt,[76] to the effect that the reaction of the mind to
the attacking stimuli in sleep is determined by the formation of
illusions. A sensory impression is recognised by us and correctly
interpreted, i.e. it is classed with the memory group to which it
belongs according to all previous experience, if the impression is
strong, clear, and long enough, and if we have the necessary time at our
disposal for this reflection. If these conditions are not fulfilled, we
mistake the objects which give rise to the impression, and on its basis
we form an illusion. “If one takes a walk in an open field and perceives
indistinctly a distant object, it may happen that he will at first take
it for a horse.” On closer inspection the image of a cow resting may
obtrude itself, and the presentation may finally resolve itself with
certainty into a group of people sitting. The impressions which the mind
receives during sleep through outer stimuli are of a similar indistinct
nature; they give rise to illusions because the impression evokes a
greater or lesser number of memory pictures through which the impression
receives its psychic value. In which of the many spheres of memory to be
taken into consideration the corresponding pictures are aroused, and
which of the possible association connections thereby come into force,
this, even according to Strümpell, remains indeterminable, and is left,
as it were, to the caprice of the psychic life.

We may here take our choice. We may admit that the laws of the dream
formation cannot really be traced any further, and therefore refrain
from asking whether or not the interpretation of the illusion evoked by
the sensory impression depends upon still other conditions; or we may
suppose that the objective sensory stimulus encroaching upon sleep plays
only a modest part as a dream source, and that other factors determine
the choice of the memory picture to be evoked. Indeed, on carefully
examining Maury’s experimentally produced dreams, which I have purposely
reported in detail, one is apt to think that the experiment really
explains the origin of only one of the dream elements, and that the rest
of the dream content appears in fact too independent, too much
determined in detail, to be explained by the one demand, viz. that it
must agree with the element experimentally introduced. Indeed one even
begins to doubt the illusion theory, and the power of the objective
impression to form the dream, when one learns that this impression at
times experiences the most peculiar and far-fetched interpretations
during the sleeping state. Thus B. M. Simon[63] tells of a dream in
which he saw persons of gigantic stature[H] seated at a table, and heard
distinctly the awful rattling produced by the impact of their jaws while
chewing. On waking he heard the clacking of the hoofs of a horse
galloping past his window. If the noise of the horse’s hoofs had
recalled ideas from the memory sphere of “Gulliver’s Travels,” the
sojourn with the giants of Brobdingnag and the virtuous
horse-creatures—as I should perhaps interpret it without any assistance
on the author’s part—should not the choice of a memory sphere so
uncommon for the stimulus have some further illumination from other
motives?