Chunk 34: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

Delbœuf[16] reaches the same conclusion through a somewhat different
line of argument. We give to the dream pictures the credence of reality
because in sleep we have no other impressions to compare them with,
because we are cut off from the outer world. But it is not perhaps
because we are unable to make tests in our sleep, that we believe in the
truth of our hallucinations. The dream may delude us with all these
tests, it may make us believe that we may touch the rose that we see in
the dream, and still we only dream. According to Delbœuf there is no
valid criterion to show whether something is a dream or a conscious
reality, except—and that only in practical generality—the fact of
awakening. “I declare delusional everything that is experienced between
the period of falling asleep and awakening, if I notice on awakening
that I lie in my bed undressed” (p. 84). “I have considered the dream
pictures real during sleep in consequence of the mental habit, which
cannot be put to sleep, of perceiving an outer world with which I can
contrast my ego.”[L]

As the deviation from the outer world is taken as the stamp for the most
striking characteristics of the dream, it will be worth while mentioning
some ingenious observations of old Burdach[8] which will throw light on
the relation of the sleeping mind to the outer world and at the same
time serve to prevent us from over-estimating the above deductions.
“Sleep results only under the condition,” says Burdach, “that the mind
is not excited by sensory stimuli ... but it is not the lack of sensory
stimuli that conditions sleep, but rather a lack of interest for the
same; some sensory impressions are even necessary in so far as they
serve to calm the mind; thus the miller can fall asleep only when he
hears the rattling of his mill, and he who finds it necessary to burn a
light at night, as a matter of precaution, cannot fall asleep in the
dark” (p. 457).

“The psyche isolates itself during sleep from the outer world, and
withdraws from the periphery.... Nevertheless, the connection is not
entirely interrupted; if one did not hear and feel even during sleep,
but only after awakening, he would certainly never awake. The
continuance of sensation is even more plainly shown by the fact that we
are not always awakened by the mere sensory force of the impression, but
by the psychic relation of the same; an indifferent word does not arouse
the sleeper, but if called by name he awakens ...: hence the psyche
differentiates sensations during sleep.... It is for this reason that we
may be awakened by the lack of a sensory stimulus if it relates to the
presentation of an important thing; thus one awakens when the light is
extinguished, and the miller when the mill comes to a standstill; that
is, the awakening is due to the cessation of a sensory activity, which
presupposes that it has been perceived, and that it has not disturbed
the mind, being indifferent or rather gratifying” (p. 460, &c.).

If we are willing to disregard these objections, which are not to be
taken lightly, we still must admit that the qualities of the dream life
thus far considered, which originate by withdrawing from the outer
world, cannot fully explain the strangeness of the dream. For otherwise
it would be possible to change back the hallucinations of the dream into
presentations and the situations of the dream into thoughts, and thus to
perform the task of dream interpretation. Now this is what we do when we
reproduce the dream from memory after awakening, and whether we are
fully or only partially successful in this back translation the dream
still retains its mysteriousness undiminished.