Chunk 11: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

Hildebrandt[35] (p. 11): “For it is a remarkable fact that dreams do
not, as a rule, take their elements from great and deep-rooted events or
from the powerful and urgent interests of the preceding day, but from
unimportant matters, from the most worthless fragments of recent
experience or of a more remote past. The most shocking death in our
family, the impressions of which keep us awake long into the night,
becomes obliterated from our memories, until the first moment of
awakening brings it back to us with depressing force. On the other hand,
the wart on the forehead of a passing stranger, of whom we did not think
for a second after he was out of sight, plays its part in our dreams.”

Strümpell[66] (p. 39): “... such cases where the analysis of a dream
brings to light elements which, although derived from events of the
previous day or the day before the last, yet prove to be so unimportant
and worthless for the waking state that they merge into forgetfulness
shortly after coming to light. Such occurrences may be statements of
others heard accidentally or actions superficially observed, or fleeting
perceptions of things or persons, or single phrases from books, &c.”

Havelock Ellis[23] (p. 727): “The profound emotions of waking life, the
questions and problems on which we spread our chief voluntary mental
energy, are not those which usually present themselves at once to
dream-consciousness. It is, so far as the immediate past is concerned,
mostly the trifling, the incidental, the “forgotten” impressions of
daily life which reappear in our dreams. The psychic activities that are
awake most intensely are those that sleep most profoundly.”

Binz[4] (p. 45) takes occasion from the above-mentioned characteristics
of the memory in dreams to express his dissatisfaction with explanations
of dreams which he himself has approved of: “And the normal dream raises
similar questions. Why do we not always dream of memory impressions from
the preceding days, instead of going back to the almost forgotten past
lying far behind us without any perceptible reason? Why in a dream does
consciousness so often revive the impression of indifferent memory
pictures while the cerebral cells bearing the most sensitive records of
experience remain for the most part inert and numb, unless an acute
revival during the waking state has shortly before excited them?”