Chunk 27: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

6. The position of a limb may incite in the dream ideas which bear some
relation or other to this limb. Thus, _e.g._, if we are employed with
the fingers we dream of numerals.

Such results would lead me to conclude that even the theory of bodily
sensation cannot fully extinguish the apparent freedom in the
determination of the dream picture to be awakened.[I]

IV. _Psychic Exciting Sources._—In treating the relations of the dream
to the waking life and the origin of the dream material, we learned that
the earliest as well as the latest investigators agreed that men dream
of what they are doing in the day-time, and of what they are interested
in during the waking state. This interest continuing from waking life
into sleep, besides being a psychic tie joining the dream to life, also
furnishes us a dream source not to be under-estimated, which, taken with
those stimuli which become interesting and active during sleep, suffices
to explain the origin of all dream pictures. But we have also heard the
opposite of the above assertion, viz. that the dream takes the sleeper
away from the interests of the day, and that in most cases we do not
dream of things that have occupied our attention during the day until
after they have lost for the waking life the stimulus of actuality.
Hence in the analysis of the dream life we are reminded at every step
that it is inadmissible to frame general rules without making provision
for qualifications expressed by such terms as “frequently,” “as a rule,”
“in most cases,” and without preparing for the validity of the
exceptions.

If the conscious interest, together with the inner and outer sleep
stimuli, sufficed to cover the etiology of the dreams, we ought to be in
a position to give a satisfactory account of the origin of all the
elements of a dream; the riddle of the dream sources would thus be
solved, leaving only the task of separating the part played by the
psychic and the somatic dream stimuli in individual dreams. But as a
matter of fact no such complete solution of a dream has ever been
accomplished in any case, and, what is more, every one attempting such
solution has found that in most cases there have remained a great many
components of the dream, the source of which he was unable to explain.
The daily interest as a psychic source of dreams is evidently not
far-reaching enough to justify the confident assertions to the effect
that we all continue our waking affairs in the dream.