Chunk 28: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

Other psychic sources of dreams are unknown. Hence, with the exception
perhaps of the explanation of dreams given by Scherner,[58] which will
be referred to later, all explanations found in the literature show a
large gap when we come to the derivation of the material for the
presentation pictures, which is most characteristic for the dream. In
this dilemma the majority of authors have developed a tendency to
depreciate as much as possible the psychic factor in the excitations of
dreams which is so difficult to approach. To be sure, they distinguish
as a main division of dreams the nerve-exciting and the association
dreams, and assert that the latter has its source exclusively in
reproduction (Wundt,[76] p. 365), but they cannot yet dismiss the doubt
whether “they do not appear without being impelled by the psychical
stimulus” (Volkelt,[72] p. 127). The characteristic quality of the pure
association dream is also found wanting. To quote Volkelt (p. 118): “In
the association dreams proper we can no longer speak of such a firm
nucleus. Here the loose grouping penetrates also into the centre of the
dream. The ideation which is already set free from reason and intellect
is here no longer held together by the more important psychical and
mental stimuli, but is left to its own aimless shifting and complete
confusion.” Wundt, too, attempts to depreciate the psychic factor in the
stimulation of dreams by declaring that the “phantasms of the dream
certainly are unjustly regarded as pure hallucinations, and that
probably most dream presentations are really illusions, inasmuch as they
emanate from slight sensory impressions which are never extinguished
during sleep” (p. 338, &c.). Weygandt[75] agrees with this view, but
generalises it. He asserts that “the first source of all dream
presentations is a sensory stimulus to which reproductive associations
are then joined” (p. 17). Tissié[68] goes still further in repressing
the psychic exciting sources (p. 183): “Les rêves d’origine absolument
psychique n’existent pas”; and elsewhere (p. 6), “Les pensées de nos
rêves nous viennent de dehors....”

Those authors who, like the influential philosopher Wundt, adopt a
middle course do not fail to remark that in most dreams there is a
co-operation of the somatic stimuli with the psychic instigators of the
dream, the latter being either unknown or recognised as day interests.

We shall learn later that the riddle of the dream formation can be
solved by the disclosure of an unsuspected psychic source of excitement.
For the present we shall not be surprised at the over-estimation of
those stimuli for the formation of the dream which do not originate from
psychic life. It is not merely because they alone can easily be found
and even confirmed by experiment, but the somatic conception of the
origin of dreams thoroughly corresponds to the mode of thinking in vogue
nowadays in psychiatry. Indeed, the mastery of the brain over the
organism is particularly emphasized; but everything that might prove an
independence of the psychic life from the demonstrable organic changes,
or a spontaneity in its manifestations, is alarming to the psychiatrist
nowadays, as if an acknowledgment of the same were bound to bring back
the times of natural philosophy and the metaphysical conception of the
psychic essence. The distrust of the psychiatrist has placed the psyche
under a guardian, so to speak, and now demands that none of its feelings
shall divulge any of its own faculties; but this attitude shows slight
confidence in the stability of the causal concatenation which extends
between the material and the psychic. Even where on investigation the
psychic can be recognised as the primary course of a phenomenon, a more
profound penetration will some day succeed in finding a continuation of
the path to the organic determination of the psychic. But where the
psychic must be taken as the terminus for our present knowledge, it
should not be denied on that account.

(_d_) _Why the Dream is Forgotten after Awakening._—That the dream
“fades away” in the morning is proverbial. To be sure, it is capable of
recollection. For we know the dream only by recalling it after
awakening; but very often we believe that we remember it only
incompletely, and that during the night there was more of it; we can
observe how the memory of a dream which has been still vivid in the
morning vanishes in the course of the day, leaving only a few small
fragments; we often know that we have been dreaming, but we do not know
what; and we are so well used to the fact that the dream is liable to be
forgotten that we do not reject as absurd the possibility that one may
have been dreaming even when one knows nothing in the morning of either
the contents or the fact of dreaming. On the other hand, it happens that
dreams manifest an extraordinary retentiveness in the memory. I have had
occasion to analyse with my patients dreams which had occurred to them
twenty-five years or more previously, and I can remember a dream of my
own which is separated from the present day by at least thirty-seven
years, and yet has lost nothing of its freshness in my memory. All this
is very remarkable, and for the present incomprehensible.