Chunk 9: Freud, Interpretation of Dreams — Chapter I

Volkelt[72] (p. 119): “It is essentially noteworthy how easily infantile
and youthful reminiscences enter into the dream. What we have long
ceased to think about, what has long since lost for us all importance,
is constantly recalled by the dream.”

The sway of the dream over the infantile material, which, as is well
known, mostly occupies the gaps in the conscious memory, causes the
origin of interesting hypermnestic dreams, a few of which I shall here
report.

Maury[48] relates (p. 92) that as a child he often went from his native
city, Meaux, to the neighbouring Trilport, where his father
superintended the construction of a bridge. On a certain night a dream
transported him to Trilport, and he was again playing in the city
streets. A man approached him wearing some sort of uniform. Maury asked
him his name, and he introduced himself, saying that his name was C——,
and that he was a bridge guard. On waking, Maury, who still doubted the
reality of the reminiscence, asked his old servant, who had been with
him in his childhood, whether she remembered a man of this name.
“Certainly,” was the answer, “he used to be watchman on the bridge which
your father was building at that time.”

Maury reports another example demonstrating just as nicely the
reliability of infantile reminiscences appearing in dreams. Mr. F——, who
had lived as a child in Montbrison, decided to visit his home and old
friends of his family after an absence of twenty-five years. The night
before his departure he dreamt that he had reached his destination, and
that he met near Montbrison a man, whom he did not know by sight, who
told him he was Mr. F., a friend of his father. The dreamer remembered
that as a child he had known a gentleman of this name, but on waking he
could no longer recall his features. Several days later, having really
arrived at Montbrison, he found the supposedly unknown locality of his
dream, and there met a man whom he at once recognised as the Mr. F. of
his dream. The real person was only older than the one in the dream
picture.