	Table of Contents

	Title Page

	Copyright Page

	Introduction

	Chapter 1 - Dreams of Avarice

	Chapter 2 - Of Human Bondage

	Chapter 3 - Blowing Bubbles

	Chapter 4 - The Return of Risk

	Chapter 5 - Safe as Houses

	Chapter 6 - From Empire to Chimerica

	Afterword: The Descent of Money

	Acknowledgements

	Notes

	List of Illustrations

	Index

	ALSO BY NIALL FERGUSON

	Paper and Iron

	The House of Rothschild

	The Pity of War

	The Cash Nexus

	Empire

	Colossus

	The War of the World

	THE PENGUIN PRESS

	Published by the Penguin Group

	Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street,

	New York, New York 10014, U.S.A.

	Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700,

	Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3

	(a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)

	Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England

	Penguin Ireland, 25 St. Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland

	(a division of Penguin Books Ltd)

	Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell,

	Victoria 3124, Australia

	(a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd)

	Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park,

	New Delhi—110 017, India

	Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632,

	New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd)

	Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue,

	Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa

	Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices:

	80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England

	First published in 2008 by The Penguin Press,

	a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.

	Copyright © Niall Ferguson, 2008

	All rights reserved

	eISBN : 978-1-440-65402-2

	Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the copyright owner and the above publisher of this book.

	The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other

	means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please

	purchase only authorized electronic editions and do not participate in or encourage electronic

	piracy of copyrightable materials. Your support of the author’s rights is appreciated.

	http://us.penguingroup.com

	Introduction

	Bread, cash, dosh, dough, loot, lucre, moolah, readies, the where-withal: call it what you like, money matters. To Christians, the love of it is the root of all evil. To generals, it is the sinews of war; to revolutionaries, the shackles of labour. But what exactly is money? Is it a mountain of silver, as the Spanish conquistadors thought? Or will mere clay tablets and printed paper suffice? How did we come to live in a world where most money is invisible, little more than numbers on a computer screen? Where did money come from? And where did it all go?

	Last year (2007) the income of the average American (just under $34,000) went up by at most 5 per cent.1 But the cost of living rose by 4.1 per cent. So in real terms Mr Average actually became just 0.9 per cent better off. Allowing for inflation, the income of the median household in the United States has in fact scarcely changed since 1990, increasing by just 7 per cent in eighteen years.2 Now compare Mr Average’s situation with that of Lloyd Blankfein, chief executive officer at Goldman Sachs, the investment bank. In 2007 he received $68.5 million in salary, bonus and stock awards, an increase of 25 per cent on the previous year, and roughly two thousand times more than Joe Public earned. That same year, Goldman Sachs’s net revenues of $46 billion exceeded the entire gross domestic product (GDP) of more than a hundred countries, including Croatia, Serbia and Slovenia; Bolivia, Ecuador and Guatemala; Angola, Syria and Tunisia. The bank’s total assets for the first time passed the $1 trillion mark.3 Yet Lloyd Blankfein is far from being the financial world’s highest earner. The veteran hedge fund manager George Soros made $2.9 billion. Ken Griffin of Citadel, like the founders of two other leading hedge funds, took home more than $2 billion. Meanwhile nearly a billion people around the world struggle to get by on just $1 a day.4