	I admit I have a vested interest in the events of Wednesday 16 September 1992. In those days, moonlighting as a newspaper leader writer while I was a junior lecturer at Cambridge, I became convinced that speculators like Soros could beat the Bank of England if it came to a showdown. It was simple arithmetic: a trillion dollars being traded on foreign exchange markets every day, versus the Bank’s meagre hard currency reserves. Soros reasoned that the rising costs of German reunification would drive up interest rates and hence the Deutschmark. This would make the Conservative government’s policy of shadowing the German currency - formalized when Britain had joined the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) in 1990 - untenable. As interest rates rose, the British economy would tank. Sooner or later, the government would be forced to withdraw from the ERM and devalue the pound. So sure was Soros that the pound would drop that he ultimately bet $10 billion, more than the entire capital of his fund, on a series of transactions whereby he effectively borrowed sterling in the UK and invested in German currency at the pre-16 September price of around 2.95 Deutschmarks). 74 I was equally sure that the pound would be devalued, though all I had to bet was my credibility. As it happened, the City editor of the newspaper I wrote for disagreed. That night, having been given something of a browbeating at the leader writers’ morning conference with the editor, I went to the English National Opera, to hear Verdi’s The Force of Destiny. It proved a highly appropriate choice. Someone announced at the interval that Britain had withdrawn from the ERM. How we all cheered - and no one louder than me (except possibly George Soros). His fund made more than a billion dollars as sterling slumped - ultimately by as much as 20 per cent - allowing Soros to repay the sterling he had borrowed but at the new lower exchange rate and to pocket the difference. And that trade accounted for just 40 per cent of the year’s profits.75

	The force of destiny: Chancellor the Exchequer Norman Lamont

	announces sterling’s exit from the European Exchange Rate

	Mechanism, 16 September 1992

	The success of the Quantum Fund was staggering. If someone had invested $100,000 with Soros when he established his second fund (Double Eagle, the earlier name of Quantum) in 1969 and had reinvested all the dividends, he would have been worth $130 million by 1994, an average annual growth rate of 35 per cent .76 The essential differences between the old and the new economic hit men were twofold: first, the cold, calculating absence of loyalty to any particular country - the dollar and the pound could both be shorted with impunity; second, the sheer scale of the money the new men had to play with. ‘How big a position do you have?’ Soros once asked his partner Stanley Druckenmiller. ‘One billion dollars,’ Druckenmiller replied. ‘You call that a position?’ was Soros’s sardonic retort. 77 For Soros, if a bet looked as good as his bet against the pound in 1992, then maximum leverage should be applied to it. His hedge fund pioneered the technique of borrowing from investment banks in order to take speculative long or short positions far in excess of the fund’s own capital.