	Stowe House: aristocratic grandeur, mortgaged to the hilt

	In preparation for a much-sought-after visit by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert in January 1845, the Duke refurbished Stowe House from top to bottom. The entire house was filled with the very latest in luxury furniture. There were even tiger skins in the royal bathroom. Queen Victoria remarked waspishly: ‘I have no such splendour in either of my two palaces.’ As if that were not enough, the Duke called out the entire Regiment of Yeomanry (at his own expense) to fire welcoming salvoes of artillery as the Queen and her Consort entered his estate. Four hundred tenants lined up on horseback to greet them, as well as several hundred smartly dressed labourers, three brass bands and a special detachment of police brought down from London for the day.13 It was the last straw for the ducal finances. To avert the complete ruin of the family, Buckingham’s son, the Marquis of Chandos, was advised to take control of his father’s estates as soon as he came of age. After painful legal wrangles, the son won the upper hand. 14 In August 1848, to the Duke’s horror, the entire contents of Stowe House were auctioned off. Now his ancestral stately home was thrown open for throngs of bargain hunters to bid for the plate, the wine, the china, the works of art and the rare books, for all the world (as The Economist sneered) as if the Duke were ‘a bankrupt earthenware dealer’.15 The total proceeds from the sale were £75,000. Nothing could better have symbolized the new age of aristocratic decline.

	Three generations of aristocracy:

	TOP LEFT: Richard Grenville,

	1st Duke of Buckingham

	TOP RIGHT: Richard Grenville,

	2nd Duke of Buckingham

	BOTTOM LEFT: Richard Grenville,

	3rd Duke of Buckingham

	Divorced by his long-suffering, much-betrayed Scottish wife, whose entire wardrobe had been seized by sheriff’s officers in London, the Duke was forced to move out of Stowe House into rented lodgings. He eked out his days at his London club, the Carlton, writing a succession of highly unreliable memoirs and incorrigibly chasing actresses and other men’s wives. Accustomed to what had once seemed a limitless overdraft facility, he bitterly grumbled that his son allowed him ‘scarcely the pay of an officer upon full pay of my own rank who has nothing beyond his own expenses to pay for’:16

	In the hour of distress [he] forced his Father into the world, neglected, forsaken & persecuted . . . Having got possession of his estates & property, [he] held them to his detriment & loss, & against every principle of honour and justice, & . . . lived to witness his Father’s dishonour and degradation.17

	‘You find me poisoned and robbed,’ he lamented to anyone at the Carlton who would listen.18 When the Duke finally expired in 1861 he was living at his son’s expense in the Great Western Hotel at Paddington railway station. Symbolically, his more parsimonious son was by now chairman of the London and North-western Railway Company.19 In the modern world, it turned out, a regular job mattered more than an inherited title, no matter how many acres you owned.

	The fall of the Duke of Buckingham was a harbinger of a new, democratic age. Electoral reform acts in 1832, 1867 and 1884 eroded what remained of the aristocratic stranglehold on British politics. By the end of the nineteenth century, paying £10 a year in rent qualified you to vote just as legitimately as earning £10 a year from property. The electorate now numbered 5.5 million - 40 per cent of adult males. In 1918 that last economic qualification was finally removed and after 1928 all adults, male and female, had the vote. Yet the advent of universal suffrage did not mean that property ownership had become universal. On the contrary: as late as 1938, less than a third of the UK housing stock was in the hands of owner-occupiers. It was on the other side of the Atlantic that the first true property-owning democracy would emerge. And it would come out of the deepest financial crisis ever known.

	Home-owning Democracy